One of the big limitations of
two-dimensional graphs is that
a single graph ussually can
only display two variables.
There are times that when it's necessary
to display multiple variables.
In this video, we discuss a few
techniques to do just that.
I should emphasize from the off side that,
displaying more than two variables
on one graph can make understanding and
interpreting the graph more challenging.
So before deciding on this path,
you should determine whether
it is indeed necessary.
Sometimes, a better approach is to use
multiple graphs arranged together to
display multiple variables, which
are typically called Small Multiples.
We will briefly mention
them in this video as well.
Let me start with a familiar
example of scatter plot.
As we know, one limitation
of a scatter plot is that it
only displays the relationship
between a pair of variables.
However, there are ways to add in more
data by creative use of color and
bubbles and et cetera.
This graph shows a murders
per 1,000 population
versus burglaries per 1,000
population in the year 2002.
And it can be seen that
the two are highly correlated.
Can we add a third-dimension to the graph?
The answer is yes, there are several
different ways, for example,
you can choose to color code the points in
the scatter plot based on some criteria.
Sometimes color intensity
is used to encode data.
For example,
we can choose to use a default color for
data points that are from
a state with larger population.
Another way is to resize the data
point based on other data column
which is what we did here.
Here the size of the circle is used
to encode the population size.
This plot is referred to
as bubble plot in Excel.
But add in a certain variable population
to this graph, we see that the states
with larger population also tend to have
higher murder rate and burglary rate.
This insight cannot be easily shown if
we did not have the third dimension in
the data.
It should be mentioned that the graph with
a third dimension is harder to understand.
So even though you can
add a third dimension,
you should only do it when
it absolutely necessary.
Another use for technique when displaying
multiple variables is to use a secondary
vertical axis.
This can be useful, for example, when the
scale of the variables are different or
the measurement unit is different.
This graph shows a murder rate and
burglary rate data in Excel.
When we use a bar graph to display
the data, the murder rate data can
be hardly read as the burglary
rate data is much larger in scale.
This issue can be solved by adding
a secondary vertical access and
changing the chart type of
burglary rate from bars to a line.
Sometimes using multiple side by side
plots is preferred to showing all data in
the same graph,
we call such a design a small multiples.
Perhaps the most well-known
small multiples design is a side
by side boxplot which are commonly used to
compare distributions for related data.
We can also have side by side histograms,
bar charts or scatter plots as well.
They are usually quite effective for
comparison.
With that aspect of small multiple design,
we need to ensure that the graphs are
consistent, arranged in a right way for
easy comparison,
I mean the right sequence.
By consistency, we mean that the graphs
should have the same chart type,
axis scale, color scheme, et cetera.
In consistence graph in a small
multiple can be confusing and
difficult to understand.
One common issue is that, by default,
Excel does not use the same axis
ranges when we create multiple graphs.
We therefore need to manually
change the axis ranges to match.
Otherwise, our side by side graph
might leave a wrong weird impression.
The graphs should also
be arranged in a way so
that the intended comparison
can be easily done.
One of the primary decision is whether
to arrange the graphs horizontally or
vertically.
You might have to try
several different layouts.
Finally, the graphs should
be sequenced properly.
Typically, the graphs are linked
by an index variable, for example,
age group, gender, et cetera.
Sometimes, there is
a natural order to follow.
In the case of age groups, it is common
to order from the youngest to the oldest.
Not following this order
can cause confusion.